i. draw civilization thing on the board
ii. draw well and strata on another board

1. civilization analogy
  aztecs vs spanish
  pablo picasso, cultural victory
  fracking -> sick and dissident
  (TALK ABOUT SLIDE: fracking_at_night)
  (NEXT SLIDE: energy_projection)
2. reason to listen
  natural gas facts:
    1. projected to displace coal in power generation market with 35% share by 2040
    2. pollutes less than oil or coal when burned at power plant
    3. bridge fuel
    4. large portion of US energy supply (TALK ABOUT SLIDE)
  fracking facts:
    1. America poised to displace Saudi Arabia as top producer of oil.
    2. fracking brings us natural gas (and tight oil).
3. credibility
  1. time spent on
    a. trade journals
    b. academic journals
    c. think-tank and government agency documents
  2. considering pursuing chemical engineering
4. thesis
  a. thesis: role and consequences
  b. the plan:
    1. process and purpose
    2. environmental concerns
    3. economic role
(SWITCH TO NEXT SLIDE: shale_closeup)
body questions:
  1. What is hydrofracking?
  2. Why is it necessary?
  3. What are the dangers?
  4. What are the advantages?
5. geology
  1. Shales: Ancient Devonian rock with organic material entombed, which turned into methane and ended up mostly in small natural fractures within the rock.
  (MENTION SLIDE: shale_closeup)
  (SWITCH TO NEXT SLIDE: natural_fractures)
  (TALK ABOUT SLIDE)
  2. Not permeable, gas trap, requires stimulation
6. process
  1. history (stanolind and halliburton)
  (SWITCH TO NEXT SLIDE: hydrofrac)
  2. process:
    1. drill a hole (now most likely horizontally)
    2. case the well while drilling, pumping drilling mud, also pumping down concrete
    3. vertical vs horizontal wells
    4. charges fired in horizontal section
    5. slurry mixed: water, sand, chemicals
    6. injected at high pressure
    7. fractures expand and are connected to well bore
    8. sand as a proppant
    9. flowback vs produced water
      (20-40% recovery of fracking fluid)
      TENORM in produced water
    10. gas trucked away to pipeline or train
    11. wastewater trucked away to treatment or deep-injection
7. environmental impact
  1. water use: A well in the US was fractured 30 times with a total volume of 2.25 million gallons.
  2. Water supplies:
    a. Elevated bromide levels found a mile downstream from a commercial treatment facility, which can be associated with liver, kidney and nervous problems.
    b. 48 wells, 1 affected with wastewater or naturally occuring brine.
    c. 20 percent had methane already in their wells
  3. surface water:
    a. open air pits, centralized impoundments (25 of em, 10 million gallons)
    b. fracking wastes can be disposed of as road de-icer, dust supressant, road maintenance and on fields.
    c. perhaps show the unlined pit video.
  4. radioactivity
    a. oil and gas also comes with NORM
    b. brine in formations dissolves radium which accumulates in equipment
    c. between 20 and 100 percent of facilities in all states reported TENORM.
    d. Production processes generate 100 tons of scale per well with high radioactivity and 230,000 megatons overall of sludge with low-to-moderate radioactivity.
    e. In order to control TENORM, metals are cleaned, filters placed in smelting stacks, sludges and scales disposed of, waters injected.
  5. upward migration
    basins in which black shales are located do not allow for rapid upward migration of fluid or brine over short timescales.
  6. soil erosion
    a. impacts on water resources
    b. pollutants washed off pad
    c. industry self regulation
8. economic impact
  1. Grown from 2% in 2000 to 37% in 2013 of US gas production.
  2. Tight oil and shale gas support 1.7m, growing to 3m jobs by end of decade.
  3. NG prices were linked to oil, became unlinked, fluctuated: 4 USD/MMBtu in 2009 and 3.30 USD/MMBTU in 2013.
  4. Boon to industries:
    a. Polyethylene producers have become some of the most cost-competitive in the world.
    b. Tire companies
    c. Rail companies: 10,000 per Q10, 97,000 first Q13
  5. boom towns: "If you bring people in, there is no local housing, certainly no affordable housing... the rates are double or triple what the might be elsewhere."
9. summary
  1. well-stimulation, we need nat gas
  2. clear dangers, others are FUD, too much rhetoric to tell really
  3. unchallenged economic benefits trickling into rest of economy. foremost energy
10. tie-back
  1. not cool to compare real people to game
  2. but sort of a reasonable analogy: just happy or angry or sick faces at the whim of a higher decision.
  3. chalco will have to suffer
11. why remember?
  1. fracking is here to stay
  2. only just getting research on it
  3. lots of jobs in it.

